Smith Plays Pokémon Youtube notes on Playthrough Viability

Red Blue and Yellow

Clefable
An often overlooked moon stone evolution. Evolves right away. Huge power spike that early trainers cant compete with. Comes very early so can be used for the whole run. Learns tons of TMs so can fill any gaps in your team.

Machamp
Route 5 yellow, Players can trade a cubone for a machoke which evolves immediately into machamp. NO good stab moves. 130 attack. so even lowkick hits hard. EXP boost from trade is always a nice boost. makes great use of rock slide, body slam and earthquake.

Gengar
can be picked up before the 4th gym at lvl 25. haunter has 115 sp with gengar at 130 special. Thunderbolt, psychic, gigadrain. In early gens, normal moves are very common so ghost typing is incredibly useful. minimal investment if you can get the trade evo to work

snorlax
low effort excellent pokemon. Can be a tough catch but once you overcome that challenge you have a powerful lvl 30 with stab headbutt, rest and amnesia, Body Slam at 35 and its ready to crush. Two guaranteed encounters.

Dodrio
Availible as soon as you hit Celadon City. Doduo can solo Erika and once evolved, is overall the strongest of the Normal-Flying Kanto birds. Extremely fast with great attack, stab normal type moves like Tri-Attack, Body Slam, and Hyperbeam hit very hard. 

Victreebel
in GEn 1, stunspore allows victreebel to outspeed, and gen1 wrap mechanics mean that when Stun Spore and wrap combine, you have a >90% to not allow your opponent to attack the next turn. 

Golem Line
Picked up early in mt moon. Most trainers have normal types or normal type attacks. 1/2 damage from Normal attacks plus geodudes incredible defense means early route trainers won't stand a chance. Rock throw hits early flying types very hard and stab rock move plus geodudes good attack means it performs well against neutral opponents as well. 100 base power DIG in Red plus stab means it hits most pokemon very hard.

Nidoking.
Well known as the best solo speedrunning in Gen 1. Very helpful for getting past Brock in Yellow Version. With a Moon Stone it can evolve again as soon as you hit Nidorino at lvl 16. Struggles against Misty and Erika, Sabrina, Strong TM Learnset including an early learner of bubblebeam which can be handy as water types are scarce. 

Blastoise.

Gyarados
Potentially available before the second gym. Incredible stats that will dominate the rest of the playthrough, but very  high investment.

Tentacruel
Great late game pickup after your 6th badge. Low investment and strong performance. Strongest surf user in the game in gen 1. Strong performance against Blain, Giovanni, Bruno, Agatha and Lance with ice beam.

Alakazam
Availible at lvl 16 if you can make the trade. Outspeeds basically everything and hits very very hard with Psychic. physically frail and has a hard time taking a hit

Jynx
Needs psychic and ice beam tms but once . Fastest stab ice beam user in gen 1. Rips Erika Giovanni and lance. Bruno and agatha with psychic as well. Lovely kiss is 75% accurate sleep which can completely shut down opponents.

Starmie
Easily one of the strongest lines in Gen 1, but does take some investment (and some helpful planning) to get rolling. Staryu can be caught South of Fuschia City with the Super Rod at the unfortunate lvl 15. You can evolve it immediately, give it a few rare candies, the Psychic TM and take it to work on the Cycling Road trainers. Psychic, Surf, Ice Beam, Thunderbolt, and Recover are all excellent choices for a moveset. Starmie has strong performance against koga, sabrina, blaine, giovanni, lorelie, bruno, agatha, and Lance. After the initial boosting phase, you are rewarded with an incredibly versatile and powerful sweeper who can dominate the rest of the game.





EMERALD

Sceptile?
The line struggles in the early game, but does start to pick up in the late game. It performs well against Tate and Liza, Juan, and Dragon Claw gives it suprising usefulness against Drake. It struggles against Wallace

Hariyama
Makuhita is Availible after the second gym at lvl 10. Its stats are not great and is a bit underleveled, but it gets stab Fighting  70 Base Power Vital Throw at lvl 13. It does need some help starting out, but it performs well against the upcoming Wattson fight. Evolving at lvl 24 means you can reasonably have Hariyama for the Wattson fight. It can tank Shockwaves, and hit back very hard, particularly against Wattson's Magneton. Thick Fat can give it a very bulky profile which also makes it useful for Flannery. Great for Norman, Sydney, Glacia. 


Slaking
A polarizing Pokemon. Slakoth has an incredibly slow and frustrating start with terrible stats and an even worse ability. Vigoroth is usable with decent stats, Yawn, Cut, and Return can help it get through the midgame. Hyperbeam recharge turn happens on the same turn as the recharge turn. You can also swap out on the Truant turn after landing a hard hit.

Salamence
Very late availibility. Salamence takes a huge amount of time and effort to aquire, but once you have done so, it is a true powerhouse that can carry the rest of the run. 

Manectric
High speed, great Special Attack, Electric typing, and relativly low evolution at 26 makes Manectric a great pokemon to pick up and help out with the later water heavy portions of the game. Faster at killing route trainers than Magneton, but not as strong for the later fights.

magneton
120 Special attack and steel typing, ghost and dark are not effective against steel. Stronger overall than Manectric because of its large amount of resistances and slightly higher special attack. Very strong against the League and Champion fights.

Blaziken




